<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
			<p>The steamer moved upriver at half-speed, and the sounds of life fell with the sun. The shores grew blurred. The quiet was the dusk. The ship itself was hushed, and her men about their duties appeared at a task spectrally, out of nowhere. She might have been trying to reach her destination unobserved. The tired air spilling over the steamer’s bows hardly reached the bridge. The bridge caught the last of the light, and a trace of anger that flushed the murk banked in the west, to which the ship was moving, was reflected in the face of an officer there, and gave him the distinction of a being exalted and stern. He was superior, and seemed to be brooding down over some passengers sitting in a group on the indistinct foredeck. They were murmuring in conversation, with a child asleep on a shawl beside one of the chairs.</p>
			<p>Yellow glims appeared low in the shadows that were Kent and Essex. That day of summer had gone. Only the wan river and the sky remembered it. A figure rose from the group on the foredeck, and his voice, surprisingly uplifted, was as if he had been compelled to an important announcement. “There’s the Great Smoke. London! London!”</p>
			<p>The child sat up quickly. He stared up and ahead, as his elders were doing. He wanted to see what London meant. He saw only the solid black shape of the bows, and the faint smear of crimson beyond. He heard waters murmuring, and edged closer to the shadow of his mother. Her hand sought his bare head, and rumpled his hair. “Nearly home, Jimbo.”</p>
			<p>The sound of the waters, the quiet that was neither day nor night, and that grave word which announced the unknown, brought the child to his feet. He felt as he did when he heard the old clock talking to itself at night in its case, or saw a star peeping at him through the bedroom curtains when everybody was asleep, and he was wondering what the clock was saying. He did not know what he expected to see; but if it were there it would be better to look at it. So he stood up. But nothing was there with any shape he knew. It was the world. He did not know what it meant. The ship was going towards a darkness which reached almost to the top of the pale sky. It seemed to have blood in it. “There you are, Jim Colet,” said his father. “That’s the place for you. See it? London, my boy.” But he could see only a darkness.</p>
			<p>He looked at his father. But his elders had forgotten him. They continued their confidential talk.</p>
			<p>“You know, I haven’t seen this river since the year the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Princess Alice</i> was lost.”</p>
			<p>Who was that princess? It did not look like a place for princesses. Sometimes his father did not mean what he said. He never smiled when he was joking with you. It looked as if the ship were going to where the night hides in the daytime. He did not know what they were all talking about. “Never heard from him afterwards.” Their words came out of the shadows without being joined together. “I remember. He was afraid of it, but he went.” It was nearly as hard to hear the talkers as to see them. Who was afraid? Where did he go?</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes. But he was afraid of his own shadow.”</p>
			<p>Why were they speaking so quietly?</p>
			<p>“Well, his shadow was enough to make any man nervous.”</p>
			<p>There was a little laugh. Jim thought they were talking as if they did not want someone to hear them. Was it somebody on the ship?</p>
			<p>“Called it fortune. His luck, or fate. I forget. The same old dream, but I suppose we can’t live without dreaming. He didn’t want to go, and yet he never came back. This river has seen a lot of men of that sort. It is a river of dreams.”</p>
			<p>A woman’s voice spoke quietly. “Some of them came true, though. There’s London to prove it.”</p>
			<p>The ship seemed to have reached the hiding-place of night. It was almost dark. The ship was going deeper into it. Was this the place where the dreams had come true? Low yellow stars moved past on either side, as though they were fixed in the darkness which had come to meet them. The night was sweeping past. The ship was trembling. It was getting cold; Jim could hardly keep from shivering.</p>
			<p>“Proof? Proof of it?” said a deep voice. “The dream is true if you have it. There is nothing else.” The speaker stood up. “I know, I tell you. It is true if you have it. Better than London, or any other proof of it. If I had my time over again⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>The speaker was tall and dim, but Jim could see the gleam of white hair and a beard. The old man’s voice was like the sound of the water. He was staring over their heads, at the darkness, at London.</p>
			<p>“What is the good of it all? What if he never did come back? I tell you there are other worlds.”</p>
			<p>Nobody answered him. The tall stranger continued to stare ahead, and was silent. Then there was another voice. “Where are we now?”</p>
			<p>The old man remained standing. He did not seem to hear the question. The only answer to it was the murmuring of the tide. The standing figure seemed to have forgotten them. The boy looked up at the tall old man who stood gazing over the heads of the others. Could he see another world? The tide continued its muttering. The lights went by in silence. Then the old man sighed. He spoke again, in a voice that seemed far away in something deep. “Gallions Reach,” he said, as if he thought he had better let them know it, after all. As he spoke, out of the night, across the water, as though to show that he was right, there came a fluttering of the air, and that broke into a sombre answer, the call of an unseen ship.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
