<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XL</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-40" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Chapter Forty</h2>
			<p class="noindent"><span class="lead-in"><span class="dropcap">W</span>hen Colet,</span> some weeks later, walked into the lounge of the Penang hotel, the palms in its garden were awake in a cooling draught. The wind could just be felt. It was as though you knew of the stir of the invincible principle of life. Life was circulating freely from its young springs. He had its cultivated lawns about him again. He had returned to it from that other world. Over in that corner was where Norrie had talked to him, the night before they left to go round the coast. Colet would have gone to that corner, but three young ladies had the table. They were certainly a noteworthy phenomenon, after Gunong Berching and the leeches. As good to look upon as the order and colour of the garden; a complete assurance that he had come back. What a multitude of women, and they were as cool and vivacious as the wind in the palms; and perhaps not in the mind of one of them was there the shadow of a thought that there was an existence other than their own. He heard a girl laugh, and then it was certain that the world these women knew was spinning on an axis they approved. He could sit down and watch this all the morning. A Chinaman in a white uniform came to him. This was obviously the day for a drink.</p>
			<p>A hand, a hearty hand, squeezed his shoulder. Not the hand of a lady. He looked behind him. Eh? Sinclair, by all the miracles of Fate. He stood up, but couldn’t speak. Sinclair laughed, as though this was a great joke, meeting again.</p>
			<p>“You old rascal, Colet. What have you been doing with yourself? Steering an open boat ever since on a full ration of hope? You look as if you had.”</p>
			<p>“What are you doing here?”</p>
			<p>“Waiting for my ship to turn round. Off to London tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>“London⁠ ⁠… well⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>They talked it all over. It was good to talk, if you had nothing to say. Then the sailor said they must have another, before he went back to the quay.</p>
			<p>“Coming to Gallions Reach, Colet?” Sinclair laughed again as he asked that and took the glasses from the Chinaman’s tray.</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>Sinclair forgot to put the glasses on the table. He held one in each hand.</p>
			<p>“What? You don’t mean it?”</p>
			<p>“I do.”</p>
			<p>“But it’s haunted, isn’t it? You don’t tell me that you’ve seen so much out here that you’ve forgotten old Perriam?”</p>
			<p>“Not me. That’s it, Sinclair. I’m going back to lay his miserable ghost.”</p>
			<p>“Here, steady with that helm. I’d see his ghost to hell first.”</p>
			<p>“Well, it’s not his ghost, really. It’s mine, my son.”</p>
			<p>Sinclair did not answer. He was watching Colet, trying to find something to say.</p>
			<p>“It’s all right, Sinclair. You needn’t look. You won’t find any tile loose. You brought me out. Now, if you please, you’ll take me back. We can’t have ghosts hanging about, can we? They must be attended to. They run the show, Sinclair.”</p>
			<p>The sailor’s eye roved over the cool and pleasant morning garden of vivacious ladies.</p>
			<p>“Well, I’m damned,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Colet. “The ghosts we know govern us. Not always what you’re looking at now, Sinclair, so you needn’t draw my attention to it. I see it. It would move a heart of stone. But there’s no fun for us unless we obey the order we know.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
